feat(docs): add dedust cookbook (#954)
tact-lang/tact: docs/src/content/docs/cookbook/dexes/dedust.mdx

---
title: DeDust.io
description: "This page list examples of working with DeDust, a decentralized exchange and automated market maker built natively on TON Blockchain and DeDust Protocol"
sidebar:
  order: 1
---

> 

Reviewer: Pls, restore this

> # DeDust.io

Reviewer: This is redundant considering the formatter (--- stuff above) should be there

> import { Callout } from 'nextra-theme-docs';

Reviewer: This should not be imported

You can read more about swaps on [DeDust documentation](https://docs.dedust.io/docs/swaps).

> <Callout type="warning" emoji="⚠️">

Reviewer: Another whoopsie when moving from tact-docs to here :)

    // The type here is actually `SwapStep?`,
    // but specifying recursive types isn't allowed in Tact yet
    nextStep: Cell?;
}

/// https://docs.dedust.io/reference/tlb-schemes#swapparams
struct SwapParams {
    // Specifies a deadline for the swap to reject the swap coming to the pool late
    // Accepts the number of seconds passed since the UNIX Epoch
    // Defaults to 0, which removes the deadline
    deadline: Int as uint32 = 0;

    // Specifies an address where funds will be sent after the swap
    // Defaults to `null`, which makes the swap use the sender's address
    recipientAddress: Address? = null;

    // Referral address, required for the referral program of DeDust
    // Defaults to `null`
    referralAddress: Address? = null;

    // Custom payload that will be attached to the fund transfer upon a successful swap
    // Defaults to `null`
    fulfillPayload: Cell? = null;

    // Custom payload that will be attached to the fund transfer upon a rejected swap
    // Defaults to `null`
    rejectPayload: Cell? = null;
}
```

### Swap Toncoin for any Jetton

```tact
/// https://docs.dedust.io/reference/tlb-schemes#message-swap
message(0xea06185d) NativeSwap {

>     // Unique identifier used to trace transactions across multiple contracts and to prevent replay attacks

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't say that it "prevents replay attacks". Query ID is just a standard practice to mark messages in the same trace with some value.

I personally have never seen practical use of this value in real projects, and I feel that it's just a legacy. Everyone just sets it to 0 anyways.

https://docs.ton.org/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/message-management/internal-messages#internal-message-body

>     // Defaults to 0, which means Native Vault will handle this for us

Reviewer 2: No, vault won't "handle this for us". It will just pass the same `0` query id further.

    queryId: Int as uint64 = 0;

    // Toncoin amount for the swap
    amount: Int as coins;

>     // Inlined fields of SwapStep Struct

Reviewer 2: @anton-trunov @novusnota what do you think about adding syntax for inlining structs like that? like `field: StructName as inline` or something similar.

Reviewer 3: Sounds interesting! @Gusarich can you please open an issue on this?

Reviewer 2: @anton-trunov actually after checking how nested structs work it turned out that they are already being inlined by default, and only put in a ref if they don't fit in current cell. So probably @a-bahdanau can rewrite some struct definitions here

Reviewer 3: yeah, but we don't guarantee it now

Reviewer: @Gusarich just as @anton-trunov said, we cannot enforce inlining as of now. I did test the code and Tact did inline SwapStep Struct automagically since it fit into the Cell, but ultimately decided not to because of lack of guarantees.

But the idea of `as inline` is good, and we should also consider `as ref` for explicitly placing the Struct/Message contents in a ref cell

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/tact-lang/tact/issues/1050

Reviewer 2: I'll mark this as resolved because this wasn't even a change request for this PR, just a related comment.

            // Address of the swap pool, which is the TON/USDT pair in this case
            poolAddress: address("EQCxE6mUtQJKFnGfaROTKOt1lZbDiiX1kCixRv7Nw2Id_sDs"),
            // Set of parameters relevant for the whole swap
            swapParams: SwapParams{}, // use defaults
        }.toCell(),
    });
}

//
// Helper Structs described earlier on this page
//

struct SwapStep {
    poolAddress: Address;
    kind: Int as uint1 = 0;
    limit: Int as coins = 0;
    nextStep: Cell?;
}

struct SwapParams {
    deadline: Int as uint32 = 0;
    recipientAddress: Address? = null;
    referralAddress: Address? = null;
    fulfillPayload: Cell? = null;
    rejectPayload: Cell? = null;
}
```

### Swap a Jetton for another Jetton or Toncoin

```tact
/// https://docs.dedust.io/reference/tlb-schemes#message-swap-1
message(0xe3a0d482) JettonSwapPayload {
    // Inlined fields of SwapStep Struct
    poolAddress: Address;
    kind: Int as uint1 = 0;
    limit: Int as coins = 0;
    nextStep: SwapStep? = null;

    // Set of parameters relevant for the whole swap
    swapParams: SwapParams;
}

fun swapJetton() {
    // NOTE: Calculate wallet address of Jetton for the target user

>     let targetJettonWalletAddress = address("");

Reviewer 2: we should explain how or at least provide a link to related docs page

Reviewer: Provided links

    send(SendParameters{
        to: targetJettonWalletAddress,
        value: ton("0.3"),
        body: JettonTransfer{
            // Unique identifier used to trace transactions across multiple contracts and to prevent replay attacks

>             // Defaults to 0, which means Native Vault will handle this for us

Reviewer 2: same queryid comment

                poolAddress: address("EQCxE6mUtQJKFnGfaROTKOt1lZbDiiX1kCixRv7Nw2Id_sDs"),
                // Set of parameters relevant for the whole swap
                swapParams: SwapParams{}, // use defaults
            }.toCell(),
        }.toCell(),
    });
}

//
// Helper Structs described earlier on this page
//

struct SwapStep {
    poolAddress: Address;
    kind: Int as uint1 = 0;
    limit: Int as coins = 0;
    nextStep: Cell?;
}

struct SwapParams {
    deadline: Int as uint32 = 0;
    recipientAddress: Address? = null;
    referralAddress: Address? = null;
    fulfillPayload: Cell? = null;
    rejectPayload: Cell? = null;
}

//
// Messages from the Jetton standard
//

message(0xf8a7ea5) JettonTransfer {
    queryId: Int as uint64;
    amount: Int as coins;
    destination: Address;
    responseDestination: Address;
    customPayload: Cell? = null;
    forwardTonAmount: Int as coins;
    forwardPayload: Cell?; // slightly adjusted
}
```

## Liquidity Provisioning

To provide liquidity to a particular DeDust pool, you must provide both assets. The pool will then issue special _LP tokens_ to the depositor's address.

> Due to the limitations of TON, it is not possible to perform two simultaneous transfers. Therefore, the balances of user deposits must be held until LP tokens are distributed.

Reviewer 2: I'd rewrite or remove this statement.

both `not possible to perform two simultaneous transfers` and `the balances of user deposits must be held until LP tokens are distributed` are misleading

    // Volatile pool is based on the "Constant Product" formula
    // Stable-swap pool is optimized for assets of near-equal value,
    // e.g. USDT/USDC, TON/stTON, etc.
    poolType: Int as uint1;

    // Provided assets
    asset0: Asset;
    asset1: Asset;

    // Minimal amount of LP tokens to be received
    // If there's less liquidity provided, the provisioning will be rejected
    // Defaults to 0, makes this value ignored
    minimalLpAmount: Int as coins = 0;

    // Target amount of the first asset
    targetBalances0: Int as coins;

    // Target amount of the second asset
    targetBalances1: Int as coins;

    // Custom payload to attack to the transaction if the provisioning is successful
    // Defaults to `null`, which means no payload
    fulfillPayload: Cell? = null;

    // Custom payload to attack to the transaction if the provisioning is rejected
    // Defaults to `null`, which means no payload
    rejectPayload: Cell? = null;
}

/// https://docs.dedust.io/reference/tlb-schemes#message-deposit_liquidity
message(0xd55e4686) NativeDepositLiquidity {
    // Unique identifier used to trace transactions across multiple contracts and to prevent replay attacks

>     // Defaults to 0, which means Native Vault will handle this for us

Reviewer 2: same queryid comment

    referralAddress: Address? = null;
    fulfillPayload: Cell? = null;
    rejectPayload: Cell? = null;
}
```

### Swap a Jetton for another Jetton or Toncoin

```tact
/// https://docs.dedust.io/reference/tlb-schemes#message-swap-1
message(0xe3a0d482) JettonSwapPayload {
    // Inlined fields of SwapStep Struct
    poolAddress: Address;
    kind: Int as uint1 = 0;
    limit: Int as coins = 0;
    nextStep: SwapStep? = null;

    // Set of parameters relevant for the whole swap
    swapParams: SwapParams;
}

/// NOTE: To calculate and provide Jetton wallet address for the target user,
///       make sure to check links after this code snippet
fun swapJetton(targetJettonWalletAddress: Address) {
    send(SendParameters{
        to: targetJettonWalletAddress,
        value: ton("0.3"),
        body: JettonTransfer{
            // Unique identifier used to trace transactions across multiple contracts
            // Set to 0, which means we don't mark messages to trace their chains
            queryId: 0,
            // Jetton amount for the swap
            amount: 10, // NOTE: change to yours
            // Address of the Jetton vault to the send message to

>             destination: address("EQDa4VOnTYlLvDJ0gZjNYm5PXfSmmtL6Vs6A_CZEtXCNICq_"),

Reviewer 4: Maybe just a typo, and user should replace it anyway, but it is Ton dedust Vault address, not Jetton Vault. Address of Usdt dedust vault is `EQAYqo4u7VF0fa4DPAebk4g9lBytj2VFny7pzXR0trjtXQaO`

Author: i'v used https://docs.dedust.io/docs/swaps#step-2-find-the-pool-ton-scale to find it

Author: could be a missprint, will double check it

Reviewer 3: Would be nice to put the link and a bit explanation how to discover this info into the article

:::

## Liquidity Provisioning

To provide liquidity to a particular DeDust pool, you must provide both assets. The pool will then issue special _LP tokens_ to the depositor's address.

Read more about liquidity provisioning in the [DeDust documentation](https://docs.dedust.io/docs/liquidity-provisioning).

```tact
import "@stdlib/deploy";

/// https://docs.dedust.io/reference/tlb-schemes#message-deposit_liquidity-1
message(0x40e108d6) JettonDepositLiquidity {
    // Pool type: 0 for volatile, 1 for stable
    // Volatile pool is based on the "Constant Product" formula
    // Stable-swap pool is optimized for assets of near-equal value,
    // e.g. USDT/USDC, TON/stTON, etc.
    poolType: Int as uint1;

    // Provided assets
    asset0: Asset;
    asset1: Asset;

    // Minimal amount of LP tokens to be received
    // If there's less liquidity provided, the provisioning will be rejected
    // Defaults to 0, makes this value ignored
    minimalLpAmount: Int as coins = 0;

    // Target amount of the first asset
    targetBalances0: Int as coins;

    // Target amount of the second asset
    targetBalances1: Int as coins;

>     // Custom payload to attack to the transaction if the provisioning is successful

Reviewer 4: Typo. attach, not attack (and same 3 lines below)

    // Custom payload to attack to the transaction if the provisioning is rejected
    // Defaults to `null`, which means no payload
    rejectPayload: Cell? = null;
}

/// https://docs.dedust.io/reference/tlb-schemes#message-deposit_liquidity
message(0xd55e4686) NativeDepositLiquidity {
    // Unique identifier used to trace transactions across multiple contracts
    // Defaults to 0, which means we don't mark messages to trace their chains
    queryId: Int as uint64 = 0;

    // Toncoin amount for the deposit
    amount: Int as coins;

    // Inlined fields of JettonDepositLiquidity Message without the opcode prefix
    poolType: Int as uint1;
    asset0: Asset;
    asset1: Asset;
    minimalLpAmount: Int as coins = 0;
    targetBalances0: Int as coins;
    targetBalances1: Int as coins;
    fulfillPayload: Cell? = null;
    rejectPayload: Cell? = null;
}

/// https://docs.dedust.io/reference/tlb-schemes#asset
struct Asset {
    // Specify 0 for native (TON) and omit all following fields
    // Specify 1 for Jetton and then you must set non-null values for the following fields
    type: Int as uint4;

    workchain: Int? as uint8 = null;
    address: Int? as uint256 = null;

> }

Reviewer 4: According to dedust docs, workchain and address are exact values, not Maybe uint8 and Maybe uint256. Moreover, it is possible to serialize this structure automatically. (kind of hack)
```
struct Asset {
    // Specify 0 for native (TON) and omit all following fields
    // Specify 1 for Jetton and then you must set non-null values for the following fields
    type: Int as uint3 = 0; //Not uint4, should always be zero
    info: JettonInfo? = null;
}
struct JettonInfo {
    workchain: Int as uint8;
    address: Int as uint256;
}
```
Not sure is it better on not. But I still think that it is better to do something like 
```
struct Asset {
    type: Int as uint4 = 0;
    workchain: Int as uint8 = 0;
    address: Int as uint256 = 0;
}
```
And not to use optional type here.

Reviewer: Yeah, let's stay with the manual approach until we'll be able to re-write this somewhat different in the future, as @Gusarich [noted here](https://github.com/tact-lang/tact/pull/954#pullrequestreview-2440314824)

const PoolTypeVolatile: Int = 0;
const PoolTypeStable: Int = 1;

const AssetTypeNative: Int = 0b0000;
const AssetTypeJetton: Int = 0b0001;

const JettonProvideLpGas: Int = ton("0.5");
const JettonProvideLpGasFwd: Int = ton("0.4");
const TonProvideLpGas: Int = ton("0.15");

// This example directly uses the provided `myJettonWalletAddress`
// In real-world scenarios, it's more reliable to calculate this address on-chain or save it during initialization to prevent any issues
fun provideLiquidity(myJettonWalletAddress: Address) {
    let jettonMasterRaw = parseStdAddress(
        address("kQDkRHlWaibL7Tww48T6xAUFevPflca7i8TIiQTacBmnDOrb")

>         .asSlice()

Reviewer 4: It is not JettonMaster, and why it is from testnet? It's a mainner pool address, in testnet-only form

Reviewer 4: Fixed. Why this discussion is not marked "Outdated"?

    );

    // Step 1. Prepare input
    let jettonAmount = ton("1");
    let tonAmount = ton("1");

    let asset0 = Asset{
        type: AssetTypeNative,
    };
    let asset1 = Asset{
        type: AssetTypeJetton,
        workchain: jettonMasterRaw.workchain,
        address: jettonMasterRaw.address,
    };

    // Step 2. Deposit Jetton to Vault
    let jettonDepositBody = JettonDepositLiquidity{
        poolType: PoolTypeVolatile,
        asset0,
        asset1,
        targetBalances0: tonAmount,
        targetBalances1: jettonAmount,
    }.build(); // notice the .build() and not .toCell(),
               // since we want some custom serialization logic!

    send(SendParameters{
        to: myJettonWalletAddress,
        value: JettonProvideLpGas,
        body: JettonTransfer{
            queryId: 42,
            amount: jettonAmount,
            // Jetton Vault

>             destination: address("kQDcUuH4xhKejjilZAIeGuBh5JRWpzbVDcO9Qfh_Q_K4q9vk"),

Reviewer 4: And this is real Jetton Vault for no-name jetton in testnet. Maybe consider using real usdt-related addresses in mainnet form? (Usdt Vault, Usdt JettonMaster, TON/USDT DeDust pool, etc.)

Reviewer 4: Fixed all addresses

        .storeCoins(self.targetBalances0)
        .storeCoins(self.targetBalances1)
        .storeMaybeRef(self.fulfillPayload)
        .storeMaybeRef(self.rejectPayload)
        .endCell();
}

extends fun build(self: NativeDepositLiquidity): Cell {
    return beginCell()
        .storeUint(0xd55e4686, 32)
        .storeUint(self.queryId, 64)
        .storeCoins(self.amount)
        .storeUint(self.poolType, 1)
        .storeSlice(self.asset0.build().asSlice())
        .storeSlice(self.asset1.build().asSlice())
        .storeRef(
            beginCell()
                .storeCoins(self.minimalLpAmount)
                .storeCoins(self.targetBalances0)
                .storeCoins(self.targetBalances1)
                .endCell()
        )
        .storeMaybeRef(self.fulfillPayload)
        .storeMaybeRef(self.rejectPayload)
        .endCell();
}

//
// Messages from the Jetton standard
//

message(0xf8a7ea5) JettonTransfer {
    queryId: Int as uint64;
    amount: Int as coins;
    destination: Address;
    responseDestination: Address?;
    customPayload: Cell? = null;
    forwardTonAmount: Int as coins;
    forwardPayload: Cell?; // slightly adjusted
}
```

### Withdraw liquidity

> To withdraw liquidity, burning LP tokens is required. You can refer to examples of Jetton burning in the [respective section of Jettons Cookbook page](/cookbook/jettons#burning-jetton).

Reviewer 4: However more tons than for the usual burn should be attached. Too small number of attached tons may cause LP tokens to be burned, but liquidity from the pool will not be sent (or will be sent partially). Example: https://tonviewer.com/transaction/093c7f78f03f821949db68070f59ecf9a1d2644a8388593d4f2e8fd1e406054e
So anyone should consider to attach at least 0.1-0.2 TON.

### Withdraw liquidity

To withdraw liquidity, burning LP tokens is required. You can refer to examples of Jetton burning in the [respective section of Jettons Cookbook page](/cookbook/jettons#burning-jetton).

> However more TONs than for the usual burn should be attached. Too small number of attached tons may cause LP tokens to be burned, but liquidity from the pool will not be sent (or will be sent partially).
> So anyone should consider to attach at least 0.5 TON. Excesses will be returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, more Toncoins should be added than for the normal burn, since adding too few may result in LP tokens being burned, but no (or only partial) liquidity being sent from the pool. Therefore, consider attaching at least $0.5$ Toncoin — excess amount will be returned.

```
